# CS 241
## Foundations of Sequential Programs
#### 1/27/2015
Elvin Yung

### Previously
* You should use the MIPS Assembly Reference Sheet, and use the specifications to create your own tests. Your assembler should give the same output as `cs241.binasm`.
* 

### Loaders
* We can't assume our code will always be loaded at a fixed address (e.g. `0x00`).
* This is because multiple programs might be loaded at the same time. There may be other programs or code in memory.
* We've been assuming that our code will be always loaded at `0x00`. However, if this assumption no longer holds, labels will break.
* For example:

```nasm
lis $1    ; 0x00000814
.word f   ; 0x0000000c
jalr $1   ; 0x00200009

f:
    add $3, $1, $3    ; 0x0c
    jr $31            ; 0x10
```

* If the code is not loaded at `0x00`, then the instruction that `f` is supposed to point to is no longer at `0x0c`, and `f` points at the wrong address. 
* We can fix this using a loader. The loader will offset labels with some given *alpha*, which is the address the program is loaded at.
* For `.word`, the loader assumes that it is constant, since it is not clear whether the `.word` refers to an address or a constant.
* For branch instructions, since those are relative to their own addresses, we don't need to worry about those instructions.
* However, now we have another problem. The assembled file is a stream of bits. How do we know which come from a `.word` with an id?
* The answer is that we can't. The assembler needs to provide more information to the loader.

### Object Code
* Introducing **object code**: The output of assemblers isn't just pure machine code. Object code consists of machine code and also metadata about the file that will be needed. 
* In CS241, we will use an object file format called MERL (MIPS Executable Relocatable Linkable).
* A MERL file consists of a **header**, **code**, and a **symbol table** (or **relocation table**.
* The header contains the cookie, the length of the MERL file, and the code length (including the header).
    * The cookie, `0x100000002`, simply lets us know that it is a MIPS file. Note that this also stands for `beq $0, $0, $2`, i.e. an instruction to skip the header. This means that MERL files can be executed as ordinary MIPS, if it's loaded at `0x00`.
    * The lengths let us know when to stop reading.
* The MIPS binary is the standard MIPS code, starting at `0x0c`, since the header is always 3 words long.
* The symbol table, or relocation table, are alternating lines of format codes and addresses. 
    * For our purposes, the format code is 1 (`0x01`). This indicates that the word to follow is a relocation address.

* We also want the assembler to generate relocatable object code, like we did by adding relocs in the example.
* In CS241, the tool `cs241.relasm` performs this.
* The `cs241.merl` tool generates non-relocatable MIPS files from MERL files.
    * It takes the `.merl` file as input, as well as some relocation address `alpha`.
    * It outputs a non-relocatable MIPS file, with the merl headers and footers removed, ready to load at address alpha.

### Loader Relocation Algorithm
In pseudocode, here's how to read a MERL file:
```
read()  // skip cookie on first line, MERL check
endMod <- read()  // get end of merl file
codeLen <- read()  // get length of code
a <- findFreeRam (codeLen + stack)  // find free memory for stuff

for (i = 0; i < codeLen; i += 4)
    MEM[a+i] <- read()  // read code into memory
end

i <- codeLen + 12  // position of footer

// perform relocation
while (i < endMod)
    format <- read()
    if (format == 1)
        rel <- read()
        MEM[a + rel - 12] += a - 12 
    else ERROR
    i += 8
end
```