# CS 246
## Object Oriented Software Development
#### 1/15/2015
Elvin Yung

### Groups
* In a long file listing (`ls -l`), the following information is provided about each file: file permissions, owner, group, size, last modified date, and filename.
* There are three relevant groups in Unix systems: user (`u`), group (`g`), and others (`o`).
* A file can only belong to one group.
* A user can belong to multiple groups. You can check your groups using the command `groups`.

### Permissions
* In a long file listing, a string such as `rwxr-xr--` might be seen in a file entry. This is a file permission string.
* Every file in Unix has three basic permissions: read (`r`), write (`w`), and execute (`x`).
* The file permission string represents nine bits, grouped into three groups of three bits each. In order, they represent the permissions of the user, the group, and others.
* What file permissions exactly entail for ordinary files and for directories are slightly different.
* For **read** (`r`):
    * For an ordinary file, this allows you to see the contents of the file using `cat`, or a text editor, and so on.
    * For a directory, this allows you to see the contents of the directory, e.g. using `ls`, or by globbing, or tab completion, and so on.
* For **write** (`w`):
    * For an ordinary file, this allows you to modify its contents.
    * For a directory, this allows you to add and remove files.
* For **execute** (`x`):
    * For an ordinary file, this allows you to try to run the file as a program.
    * For a directory, this allows you to navigate into the directory.
* The file permissions string can be represented as a three-digit octal number which converts the number `rwx` into octal for each group. 
* For example, the permission string `rwxr-xr--` (or `111101100` in binary) can be represented in octal as 745.
* The owner of the file can change file permissions using the program `chmod`. The basic syntax is `chmod [MODE] [FILENAME]`.
* The syntax of the `mode` is roughly `{ownership class} {operator} {permissions}`. 
    * The ownership class is some combination of the letters `ugoa` (user, group, others, or all).
    * The operator is one of `+` (add), `-` (revoke), or `=` (set exactly).
    * the permissions is some combination of the letters `rwx` (respectively read, write, and execute).
* For example, `chmod a=rw hello.txt` gives everyone read and write permissions to `hello.txt`.
* An alternate mode syntax is simply `{permissions octal} {filename}`. 
For example, `chmod 777 hello.txt` gives everyone read, write, and execute permissions to `hello.txt`.

### Variables
* Setting a variable in a shell environment in Unix is simple. You can use the command `x=1` to assign the value `1` to `x`. Afterwards, you can retrieve it using `$x`.
* Environment variables in linux are always strings.
* The `PATH` variable stores paths to directories that the shell looks at if the user wants to run a program.

### Scripts
* **Scripts** are files containing sequences of Unix commands executed as a program.
* To execute a script, you must have execute permission on the script file.
* To execute a script, you can either:
    * provide the full path of the script (including aliases such as `.`)
    * modifying `PATH` to contain the script's location

#### Command-line Arguments
* Arguments can be accessed with the variables of the form `${n}`, which would retrieve the `n`th argument of the command.
* The special variable `#` provides the number of arguments to the command.
* The special variable `?` provides the return code of the last command.
