# CS 246
## Object Oriented Software Development
#### 1/6/2015
Elvin Yung

* **Instructor:** Nomair Naeem 
    * Email: nanaeem@uwaterloo.ca
    * Office: DC 3121
    * Office hours: 10-11am MW
* ISA: Kirstin Bradley
    * Email: cs246@uwaterloo.ca
    * first responder

### Mark breakdown
* Final exam: 40%
* Midterm: 20% (March 2rd, 4:30-6:20)
* Assignments: 40%
    * A0
    * A1-4: 7% each
    * A5: 12%

There is no other way to get extra credits. There will be no assignment solutions.

### Reference books
* *Absolute C++ 5th Edition*
* Scott Meyers' books
* *Exceptional C++* by Herb Sutter

Attending class and taking course notes will get you a long way towards doing well in your exams.

Introduction to Object Oriented Programming and to tools and techniques for software development.

### Modules
1. Linux Shell (2 weeks)
2. C++03 (10 weeks)
3. Tools
4. Software Engineering Principles

#### Module 1: Linux Shell
* A **shell** is an interface for interacting with an operating system.
    * A **graphical** shell is based on visual interactions. It is more intuitive and easier to learn, but it is more difficult to perform more complex tasks with it.
    * A **command-line** shell is based on text commands input to a prompt. It is less constrained than a graphical shell, but has a steeper learning curve. 
* The Linux shell has its origins from the 1970s.
    * The first shell was **sh**, created by Stephen Bourne. Later this would be referred to as the Bourne shell.
    * There were also other shells, such as **csh** (which later became **tcsh**), and **ksh**, Korn shell.
    * Sh later evolved in to the Bourne Again Shell, or **bash**.

