# CS 246
## Object Oriented Software Development
#### 1/27/2015
Elvin Yung

### More on I/O with C++
* A read from `cin` is converted to `void*`.
* Once a read from `cin` fails, all subsequent reads fail, unless you `cin.clear()` and `cin.ignore()` them.
* `cin.clear()` acknowledges that we have seen the failed read.
* `cin.ignore()` discards the next item and looks beyond it for more input.

### Reading Strings
* C++'s standard library provides a string type `std::string`. 
* To use it, you simply `#include` it, i.e. `#include <string>`.
# `cin` reads strings by ignoring all leading whitespcae, start at the first non-space character, and keep going until it hits another whitespace.
* To read a line, the standard library provides another fucntion: `getline(cin, s)`. It reads from current position until reaching a newline.

### I/O Manipulators
* In C, you can specify a format to print an integer as hexadecimal (`%x`). However, in C++, you would use I/O manipulators.
* I/O manipulators change the way data is input and output in C++.
* For example, to print an `int x` as hexadecimal, you would use the statement `cout << hex << x;`.
* There are some I/O manipulators in the header `<iomanip>`. 

### I/O Streams
* `cin` is a variable of type `istream.
* `cout` is a variable of type `ostream`.
* The stream abstraction is applicable to other source of data.
* The header `<fstream>` (which stands for *filestream*) provides the `ifstream` and `ofstream` types, for performing I/O with files.
* Example: Reading from a file

```c++
#include <fstream>
#include <iostream>
#include <string>
using namespace std;

int main() {
    string s;
    ifstream f("myfile.txt");
    while (f >> s) {
        cout << s << endl;
    }
}
```

* As can be seen, `ifstream` works exactly the same as `istream`. To read from `cin` instead of `myfile.txt` would simply require substituting `cin` for `f` in `f >> s`.
* The file opened by `f` is closed "automatically" when `f` goes out of scope, but only because `f` is stack allocated. If `f` was heap allocated, this would no longer be the case.
* Basically, anything you can do with `cin` (`istream`), you can do with `f` (`ifstream`).
* The same stream abstraction can be used to read/write to strings. The header `<sstream>` provides the `istringstream` and `ostringstream` types for working with strings as streams.
* The function `str`, in both `istream` and `ostream`, gets/sets the string stored in the stream.
* `istringstream` can be used, among other things, to convert a `string` into an `int`. The `atoi` (ASCII to integer) library uses this mechanism.


