# CS 246
## Object Oriented Software Development
#### 1/13/2015
Elvin Yung

### Redirection
* A program in Unix has an incoming stream, `stdin` (standard input), and two outgoing streams, `stdout` (standard output), and `stderr` (standard error).
* When a program needs input, it looks to the standard input, which is by default from keyboard. 
* With input redirection (using `<`), the input is from a file instead.
* When a program wants to send output, it sends to the standard output, which is by default to display.
* With output redirection (using `>`, or `>>` to append), the output is to a file instead. 
* Standard output is buffered. This means that the output is not instantaneously displayed.
* The advantage of buffering is to mitigate the cost of performing I/O by doing it less frequently.
* The standard error stream is used when outputting error messages.
* Unlike standard output, standard error is not buffered, which allows error messages to be displayed or logged instantaneously.
* To redirect to stderr, we use the `2>` symbol.

### Argument Expansion
* Inside a double quoted string, anything wrapped around backquotes will be evalued and replaced with the output.
* For example, `echo "Today is `date` and I am `whoami`"` will print `Today is Tue 13 Jan 2015 14:49:51 EST and I am elvinyung`.
* Wrapping it with brackets and then prepending a dollar sign (e.g. `$(arg)`) is equivalent.
* This allows commands to nest.

### Pipes
* We can use the output of one program as the input of another program by piping (`|`).
* For example, if you wanted to count the number of words in the first 20 lines of a file, you can use the command `head -20 FILE | wc -w`.

### `grep`
* We can perform pattern matching with the `grep` command. In CS 246, we will be using `egrep`, or `grep -E`, the extended regular expression variant.
* regex is trivial, i'm not going to write this down

