# CS 246
## Object Oriented Software Development
#### 3/24/2015
Elvin Yung

## Lecture 21
### More on STL

* An iterator is really an abstraction of a pointer in memory. Here is how to forward iterate over a vector:

```c++
for (vector<int>::iterator i = v.begin(); i != v.end(); i++) {
  cout << *i << end;
}
```

* To iterate backwards, all you need to do is use a reverse iterator `vector<T>::reverse_iterator`: 

```c++
for (vector<int>::reverse_iterator i = v.rbegin(); i != v.rend(); i++) {
  // do stuff
}
```

* In either case, the `begin` or `rbegin` point at the first element to be iterated over, and `end` or `rend` point at one past the last element to be iterated over.
* Also, to iterate across elements, you *always* use the increment (`++`) operator, no matter what direction the iterator ranges across.

* You might find these methods useful:
  * `pop_back()` destroys the last element in the vector.
  * `erase(position)` or `erase(first, last)` removes an element or a range of elements from the class.

#### Dictionaries
* You might already be familiar with dictionaries as associative arrays, key-value pairs, or hash tables.
* Dictionaries, or `std::map` are parameterized on two types - the type for the key and the type for the value.
* Here's a simple example:

```c++
#include <map>
using namespace std;

map<string, int> m;
m["abc"] = 5;  // associates the key "abc" in m with the value 5
m["def"] = 10;  // ditto, "def" with 10
cout << m["def"] << endl;  // access the value associated with key
```

* The map API provides a method `count(key)` which counts the number of elements with the given `key`. Obviously, since an associative array maps a key to a value exactly once, it basically returns 1 if the key is in the map, and 0 otherwise.

* You can use iterators over the map. The usage is very similar to the vector iterator API:

```c++
for (map<string, int>)::iterator i = m.begin(); i != m.end(); ++i) {
  // do stuff
  cout << i->first << i->second << endl;
}
```

* It's very important to note that the iterator does not necessarily traverse over the keys in the order they were inserted. Instead, it depends on the implementation of the map. (We don't really care whether it's a hash table, an array, a trie, etc.)

### Visitor Design Pattern
* The visitor design pattern depends on the concept of **dynamic dispatch**, which is essentially implemented by the `virtual` keyword in c++. Basically, the method that is called depends on the runtime type of the object on which the object was called. 

#### Implementing Double Dispatch
* To examine this, let's suppose that we're making a game. There are two types of enemies (subclassing an abstract `Enemy` class), `Turtle` and `Bullet`. There are also two types of weapons (subclassing an abstract `Weapon` class), `Stick` and `Rock`.
* There are four possible ways to attack an `Enemy` with a `Weapon`, obviously. 
* There are two ways to implement this.
* The first naive solution is to implement some sort of `virtual void Enemy::strike(weapon&)` on the `Enemy`, and use conditionals to select the appropriate `strike` method for each enemy type.
* The second option is to implement a `strike` method on the `Weapon`.
* Instead, we could use double dispatch, with the visitor design pattern.

```c++
class Enemy {
public:
  virtual void strike(Weapon &w) = 0;
  ...
};

class Turtle : public Enemy {
public:
  void strike(Weapon &w) {
    w.useOn(*this);  // pass as reference
  }
};

class Bullet : public Enemy {
public:
  void strike(Weapon &w) {
    w.useOn(*this);  // pass as reference
  }
};
```

* `useOn` is the "same" across both subclasses, but we can't implement it on the base `Enemy` class, since if we did, the `Weapon` would not know what type the enemy is.

```c++
class Weapon {
public:
  virtual void useOn(Turtle &t) = 0;
  virtual void useOn(Bullet &b) = 0;
};

class Stick : public Weapon {
public:
  void useOn(Turtle &t) {
    // turtle struck with stick
  }

  void useOn(Bullet &b) {
    // bullet struck with stick
  }
};

class Rock : public Weapon {
public:
  void useOn(Turtle &t) {
    // turtle struck with stick
  }

  void useOn(Bullet &b) {
    // bullet struck with stick
  }
};
```

* Essentially, we would still call `strike` on the Enemy class, but that simply does the work of calling `useOn` on the weapon. 
* Using method overloading, we can implement different `useOn` methods for each type of enemy, and we don't have to do any work to determine the type of anything.
* Then you could do something like this in your mainline:

```c++
Enemy *e = new Bullet;
Weapon *w = new Rock;
e->strike(*w);
```

* This is much more elegant than simply using if-else case to check for the type of each thing being operated upon.

### The Visitor Pattern, Revisited
* Suppose that we have an abstract `Book` class, and the classes `TextBook` and `Comic` inherit from it, and we are only able to use these classes by API. 
* Suppose that we want to add a cataloguing system to the books, which counts the `TextBook`s by `topic` and `Comic`s by maybe something like `Protagonist`s.
* The standard way to do this is by overloading the `Catalogue` update method by class.
* However, suppose that the `Book` classes accept visitors:

```c++
class Book {
public:
  virtual void accept(BookVisitor &v) {
    v.visit(*this);
  }
};

class TextBook : public Book {
public:
  void accept(BookVisitor &v) {
    v.visit(*this);
  }
};

class Comic : public Book {
public:
  void accept(BookVisitor &v) {
    v.visit(*this);
  }
};
```

* The `BookVisitor` class is also provided:

```c++
class BookVisitor {
  public:
    virtual void visit(Book &b) = 0;
    virtual void visit(TextBook &t) = 0;
    virtual void visit(Comic &c) = 0;
}
```
* Now we can implement the catalog class to properly count books by author, topic, or protagonist:
```c++
class MyCatalog : public BookVisitor {
  map<string, int> catalog;
  public:
    void visit(Book &b) {
      catalog[b.getAuthor()]++;
    }

    void visit(TextBook &t) {
      catalog[t.getTopic()]++;
    }

    void visit(Comic &c) {
      catalog[c.getProtagonist()]++;
    }
}
```

* This is the primary use of the visitor pattern - essentially, if the API of the given class provides support for visitors, we can separate concerns by dynamically dispatching the method called in multiple ways.

