# CS 246
## Object Oriented Software Development
#### 1/6/2015
Elvin Yung

### The Linux Filesystem
* We will make a distinction between two different types of files: *ordinary files*, and *directories*. The difference is that directories can contain other files, including other directories.
* The result is that the filesystem is structured like a tree.
* In the Linux filesystem, `/` is the root directory. Inductively, you can create an absolute path to any file starting from the root.
* Your **current directory** (or current working directory) is the directory you are in at the given moment. When you log in, your current directory will be your **home directory**. At any moment, you can find your current working directory with the command `pwd`, which stands for "print working directory".
* An **absolute path** is a path to some file that starts from filesystem root.
* A **relative path** is a path to some file that starts from the current working directory. `..` denotes a parent directory.
* You can navigate to any directory using either absolute or relative path format using the command `cd`, which stands for "change directory".
* You can list the contents of a directory using the command `ls`, which stands for "list". The flag  `-a` shows all the files of the directory, including hidden files.

#### Special Directories
Unix paths provide the following aliases:
* `.` is the current directory. 
* `..` is the parent directory of the path.
* `~` is the user's home directory.
* `~{user}` is the user's home directory.

#### Wildcard Matching
* Linux provides a globbing mechanism that allows you to match only certain strings.
* For example, to list all files in a directory that ends in `.txt`, you can use the command `ls *.txt`.
* The shell looks at the current directory and finds all the files that match this pattern.
* The names of the matched files are substituted in place of the globbing pattern and then the command runs.
* Because the shell matches the pattern, other commands can also use globbing.

### Working with the shell
* The command `cat`, which stands for "concatenate", displays the contents of a single file. It is typically also used to concatenate a list of files.
* `^C` (Ctrl-C) ends a process.
* `^D` (Ctrl-D) signals end of input, which sends the EOF character to the process.
* The command `wc` provides a line, word, and character count for a given file.

#### Redirection
* The `>` operator pipes the output of some command into a file. If a file with that filename previously existed at that path, `>` will overwrite the contents of that file.
* The `>>` operator appends the output instead of overwriting it to the filename.
* The `<` operator pipes the contents of some file into the input.
* It is possible to do both input and output in the same command. For example, `cat < in.txt > out.txt` copies the contents of `in.txt` to `out.txt`. 


