# CS 241
## Foundations of Sequential Programs
#### 1/6/2015
Elvin Yung

Instructor: Ashif Harji
ISA: Sean Harrap
Class: 10:00 AM - 11:20 AM, TTh

### What are sequential programs?
* Any program that isn't concurrent or parallel is *sequential*.
* This course concerns the compilation of program code, and what happens in each step.

### What happens when you compile and run a program?
* Before we can answer that question, we must first ask another: *What is a compiler?*
    * A compiler translates code from a *source* program (usually in some sort of high level language) to an equivalent *target* program (usually in some sort of machine code).
* Why do we need a compiler?
    * Humans write code.
    * Thus, we want code to be easier for people to understand.
    * Safety (e.g. in type)
    * provide abstraction
* Why can't we just have the computer read the source language?
    * slower
    * relies on specific set of hardware, whereas higher language are usually machine independent.
    * with the computer using a lower level language, we can have multiple high level languages that all compile down to the same target.
* The basic process is as follows (for a basic CS241 compiler):
    * Basically, the source program goes through *scanning*, or *lexical analysis*, and becomes a stream of tokens. 
    * The tokens go through *parsing*, which generates a parse tree
    * The parse tree undergoes *semantic analysis*, which outputs a parse tree and a symbol table.
    * Then they go through *code generation*, which outputs assembly code.
    * The assembly code goes through the *assembler* (which is basically a simple compiler), and becomes machine code.
* The assembler is a specific type of compiler that translates between assembly code and machine code.

### Bits
* A *bit* is a 0 or 1, an abstraction of high/low voltages or magnets.
* A *byte* is 8 bits. An example of a byte is `11001001`. There are 256 (`2^8`) possible bytes.
* A *word* is a machine specific grouping of bytes, 4 or 8 bytes long (32-bit or 64-bit). In this course, we will use a 32-bit word size.
* A *nibble* is 4 bits.

### Bytes
* Given a byte in computer memory, what does it mean?
* Without context, nothing. Everything in a computer is a stream of bits.
* It could be a number. Conventionally in binary, `11001001` is 201. It is an unsigned value.
* Then how are negative numbers represented?

#### Sign-magnitude
* Simple approach: **sign-magnitude** representation. Reserve the first bit of a byte to represent a *sign* (0 is positive, 1 is negative), and use the rest to represent the unsigned *magnitude*. 
* For 8 bit, we can represent numbers from -127 to 127.
* Problem: there are 2 zeroes (`10000000` and `00000000`), which means you need two comparisons for null value.
* Problem: adding is not symmetric. If two numbers have common sign, just add magnitude. However, if the signs are different, then use the sign of the larger magnitude and use the difference in magnitude. You need special circuits.

#### 2s complement
To interpret an n-bit value:
1) Interpret the number as unsigned.
2) If the first bit is zero, then done.
3) Else, subtract 2^n.

To get the 2s complement negation of an n-bit number, subtract the number from 2^n. Alternatively, flip the bits and add one.

e.g. for n=3:
* `000` = 0
* `001` = 1
* `010` = 2
* `011` = 3
* `100` = -4
* `101` = -3
* `110` = -2
* `111` = -1

For 8 bits, 2s complement gives us the range [-128..127], with only one zero. The arithmetic is mod 2.

### Hexadecimal notation
* Base 16: 0..9, A..F (or a..f)
* Each hex digit is 4 bits, so `11001001` can be represented as `C9`.
* Hex numbers are usually prefixed with `0x`. In the example above, `11001001` would be `0xC9`.


### Back to bytes
So given a byte, how can we tell which interpretation is correct?

The answer is still no.

But wait! We don't even know if it is a number. It could also be a character, which *also* depends on the encoding scheme. In this course, we will assume conventional ASCII.

