# CS 241
## Foundations of Sequential Programs
#### 1/8/2015
Elvin Yung

### Cont'd
What does `11001001` represent? 
* Number
* Character
* Address
* Random flags
* Instructions (or in our case, a part of an instruction, since our instructions are 32-bit)

We can't really know. We need to remember our intent when we stored the byte.

### Machine Language
Machine Language - MIPS
* What does an instruction look like?
* What instrutions are there?
We will use a simplified flavor of MIPS with 18 different 32-bit instruction types.

In order to understand how machine langauge works, we need to understand more about the architecture of the system. You might already know that in a very high level way, the CPU communicates with the RAM with some sort of bus.

### CPU
The CPU is the "brains" of the computer. These parts are inside the CPU:
* The **control unit** fetches and decodes instructions, coordinates I/O, and dispatches to other parts of the computer to carry them out.
* The **ALU**, or **arithmetic logic unit**, is responsible for the mathematical operations, logical operations, and comparisons.
* **Registers** are a small amount of memory inside the CPU. We have 32 general purpose registers (of 5 bits each).

### Memory
In descending order of speed:
* Registers
* Cache - A part of main memory that's stored closer to the CPU that stores previously accessed data for faster reaccess time.
* Main memory (RAM)
* Secondary storage (Tape, HDD, network, etc.)

In this course, we will mostly be concerned with registers and main memory.

### MIPS
MIPS has access to 32 general purpose registers, as well as special registers such as `HI`, `LO`, `PC`, `IR`, `MAR`, and `MDR`.
* `$0` always stores 0.
* `$30` and `$31` are special by convention (i.e. not by hardware). 

An example register operation is "add the contents of the registers `s` and `t`, and store the result in `d`." (`add d,s,t`) We denote this as `$d <- $s + $t`. Since we have 5 bits per register, and 3 registers are used in this example, 15 bits need to be set aside for the registers. Since a word is 32 bits long, we have 17 bits left for the instruction.

* There are two types of instructions, register and immediate.
* Register instructions work entirely with registers.
* Immediate instructions work with some combination of registers and immediate values, that is, literals. Immediate values are interpreted as two's complement.

* Multiplication (`mult`/`multu`) gives you a 64 bit result in the reserved `HI` and `LO` registers, since multiplying 2 32-bit numbers can give you 64-bit numbers.
* Division (`div`/`divu`) gives you some quotient stored in the `HI` and `LO` registers.
* The `HI` and `LO` registers can be read (moved to a general purpose register) with the `mfhi` and `mflo` instructions.

### Main Memory
* **RAM** stands for random access memory. This is the main memory of the computer. 
* This is a large amount of memory that is stored away from the CPU. For our purposes, the RAM is just a big array `n` bytes, where `n ~= 10^9` (a gigabyte). 
* Each byte has an address, running from 0 to `n-1`, but we group everything on words, so we will use addresses divisible by 4 (`0x0`, `0x4`, etc.), and each 4-byte block is a word. 
* The data travels between the CPU and the RAM on a bus, which we can think of as 64 wires connecting the two components. Accessing RAM is much slower than accessing registers. 
* The CPU interacts with the bus using the `MAR` (memory address register) and `MDR` (memory data register) registers. 

To move data between the RAM and CPU:
* Load: transfer a word from a specified address to a specified register. The desired address goes into the `MAR` register, and the and then goes out onto the bus. When it arrives at the RAM, the associated data is sent back from the bus onto the `MDR` register, and then moved onto the destination register.
* Store: Exactly like load, but in reverse.

### Programs
* How does the computer know which words contain instructions and which contain data?
* Surprise! It doesn't. There is a special `PC` (program counter) register, which holds the address of the next instruction to run. 
* The `IR` register stores the current instruction.
* By convention, we guarantee that some fixed address contains code, and then initialize PC to whatever the fixed address is. 
* Then, the control unit runs the fetch-execute cycle. In pseudocode, this is the fetch-execute cycle:

```
PC <- 0
loop
    IR <- MEM[PC]
    PC <- PC + 4
    decode and execute instruction at IR
end loop
```

TODO: reword this
* How does a program get executed? 
* There is a program called the loader, which puts the program in memory, and sets `PC` to the address of the first instruction in the program. 
* What happens when the program ends? 
* We need to return control to the loader. `PC` is set to the address of the next instruction in the loader. 
* Which instruction is that?
* `$31` will by convention store the correct address to retunr to, so we just need to set PC to `$31`.
* We will use the jump register command (`jr`) to update the value of `PC`.



