# Accessibility

CS 349 - User interfaces, LEC 001

7-13-2016

Elvin Yung

[Slides](https://www.student.cs.uwaterloo.ca/~cs349/s16/slides/11.2-accessibility.pdf)



* Curb cuts: make it easy for people people on wheelchairs to get through a curb
* We make accommodations for people with different abilities in real life.
* It should also be done in software.

* Accessibility isn't just about being on a wheelchair or being blind. We should to accommodate
* We want to design for the "average" person, but there's no average person.
* Every time you design something, you're at risk of alienating certain groups of people from your product.
* We *all* have temporary or situational disabilities.
  * Obvious: ones being sick, being injured, etc.
  * Driving: limited attentional bandwidth
  * Underwater diving: impaired sight, hearing, mobility, etc.
  * Using an ATM in the middle of the night in Kitchener
  * Walking down the street and texting

## Walking + Pointing Performance
* Experiment to measure performance on a tapping task on a phone in different situations
* Situations include: sitting, treadmill (different speeds), obstacle course
* Result: performance seated and walking are fairly similar, but in an obstacle course, the task took more time and had a higher error rate.
* Obvious in hindsight - obstacle course is the only thing that needs attention outside the phone

* Takeaway: it's better if you can focus on a single task.
* This is why texting and driving is bad!

* Another experiment: reading comprehension
* When walking, people were slower to read, and had higher error rates.

* When you're walking, you're most concerned about the attention split,

## Designing for Walking
* Sitting UI: small menu items, small buttons
* Standing UI: make everything bigger, reduces cognitive load
* This is also one of the reasons why mobile UIs are better: on the go, you're going to get a better experience if you have less cognitive load.

## Aging
* Natural effects of aging:
  * Worse coordination
  * Visual coordination - coordination starts to fade by the 40s, and start to need reading glasses by the 50s
  * Hearing impairments
  * Memory loss

* Baby boomers: huge spike of birth rate after WWII
* They're all getting old now! If you were born in 1951 you are now 65, i.e. retiring.
* As a designer, it might be an opportunity to build usable interfaces for this demographic.

[Video: MIT AGNES](https://youtu.be/czuww9rp5f4) - a suit for designers to understand the usability challenges with aging

* *We should design technologies to be inclusive. They often end up helping everyone!*

## Statistics on Impairments

TODO: Copy from slides

## OS Support
* Any recent version of Windows, OSX, etc. have a range of tools for accessibility issues.
* This is awesome.
* There are all kinds of things to manage motor/visual/audial issues.
* It's a decent solution, but not perfect. Users end up having to memorize lots of keyboard shortcuts, be a good touch typer, etc.

## Colorblindness
* Not being able to distinguish two colors
* Color-coded UIs are often bad for this

## Motor Impairments
* Sticky keys
* Filter keys
* Repeat rate

### Various tools to help with motor impairments
* [Integramouse](integramouse.com) - straw-like mouse for people with no arm movement
* Voice dictation/transcription
* Human-brain interface stuff
  * Would be awesome... if it worked!

* [Angle Mouse](https://depts.washington.edu/aimgroup/proj/angle/)

### Cognitive Impairments

* [Phosphor](http://patrickbaudisch.com/projects/phosphor/index.html) - highlight changes in the UI, for people who have trouble keeping track of where they were in the UI

## The "Curb Cut" Phenomenon
* A accessibility-minded design that ends up helping everyone

* Example: cassette tapes, developed as an alternate to reel-to-reel tapes for visually impaired people
* Another example: closed captioning, originally intended for which ended up being used to many more purposes

## Reasons to Design for Accessibility
* You're legally motivated to make your software accessible.
* If you plan on selling software to a US government body, it needs to make accessibility accommodations.
* [Class action lawsuit against Target](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Federation_of_the_Blind_v._Target_Corp.)

* Web accessibility is essential for equal opportunity.
