# STAT 231
## Statistics
#### 1/7/2015
Elvin Yung

**Instructor:** Chong Zhang

### Administrative stuff
* See syllabus for detailed information.
* Course syllabus is posted on D2L. Please read it!
* Absolutely no snoring!

#### Grading Scheme
* Grading scheme A:
    * Tutorial tests: 15%
    * Midterm 1: 15%
    * Midterm 2: 15%
    * Final exam: 55%
* Scheme B:
    * Tutorial tests: 15%
    * Best midterm: 15%
    * Worst midterm: 5%
    * Final: 65%

#### Tutorial tests
* January 23, 9:30 - 10:20 AM
* February 27, 9:30 - 10:20 AM
* March 27, 9:30 - 10:20 AM

#### Midterms
* Midterm 1: Tuesday, February 3, 4:30 - 6:00 PM
* Midterm 2: Tuesday, March 10, 4:30 - 6:00 PM

#### Office Hours
* Thursday 9:00 - 10:00 AM

### Chapter 1: Introduction to Statistical Sciences
* The *Statistical Sciences* are mainly concerned with empiricial studies, that is, learning by observation or experiment. 

#### Aspects of Empirical Studies:
* problem formulation
* planning of an experiment
* data collection
* analysis of the data
* conclusions

A key feature of an empirical study is that it involves uncertainty/randomness. (If we run the experiment more than once, we don't get identical results each time.)

We will look at these aspects more closely in Chapter 3.

### Statistical Jargon: Populations and Processes
* A **population** is a collection of units. (example: all persons aged 18-25 living in Ontario)
* A **process** is the mechanism by which units are produced. (example: sequence of claims generated by car insurance policy holders, where the units are individual claims)
* **Variates** are characteristics of the units, i.e. some variable associated with each unit for every unit. There are four types of variates: continuous (such as weight and blood pressure), discrete (such as presence or absense of a disease), categorical (such as hair colour or marital status), or other data, such as an image or an open ended response to a survey question.
* An **attribute** of a population or process is a function of a bariate which is defined for the entire population or process. (example: proportion of adults in Ontario who own a smartphone, for a population of adults in Ontario)

### Approaches to Data Collection
* **Sample surveys:** Information about a finite population is obtained by selecting a representative sample of units from the population and determining the variates of interest for each unit in the sample.
    * In other words, take a subset of the population that represents the entire population, and then take the data that you need from each unit in the sample.
* **Observational studies:** Assuming an infinitely many (or similarly sized) population, information is collected without attempting to change any variates.
* The main difference between sample survey and obesrvational study is that the population is near-inifinite (or infinite-like) in observational studies.
* An **experimental study** is one in which the experimental has control over one or more variates. 
* These three types of studies are not mutually exclusive. For example, sometimes it is not clear whether a study is a sample survey or an observational survey.

### Measures of Central Tendency or Location
* Let the data be represented by a sorted list of real numbers `y = {y_1, y_2, ..., y_n}`.
* The sample **mean** or average is `(1/n) * sum(y)`.
* The sample **median**:
    * if `n` is odd: `y_[(n+1)/2]`
    * if `n` is even: `(1/2) * (y_[n/2] + y_[(n/2) + 1])` (The average of the middle two observations is chosen for convenience.)
* The **mode** is the most common value in the set of data. If the values are all unique, then the mode does not exist. This measure is the most useful for discrete or categorical data with a small number of unique data points.
    * For frequency or grouped data, the class with the highest frequency is called the **modal class**.

#### For Friday's Class
* Get course notes. Read chapter 1.
* Review material from STAT 230.
* The slides will be posted on D2L.

