# Input

CS 349 - User interfaces, LEC 001

7-6-2016

Elvin Yung

[Slides](https://www.student.cs.uwaterloo.ca/~cs349/s16/slides/10.2-input.pdf)

* The iPod was the perfect input method for a device where most of the UI elements were list-based.
* But it's not

## Classifying Computer Input
* Sensing method
  * Mechanical - switch, potentiometer
  * Motion - accelerometer, gyroscope
  * Contact - capacitive touch, pressure sensor
  * Signal processing
* Continuous vs discrete
* There are different input devices for different purposes, but we mostly use the mouse and the keyboard.

## Text Input
### QWERTY
* The QWERTY keyboard layout was first introduced in the Remington Model I typewriter in 1873.
* They were trying to design a keyboard that wouldn't jam, which happened when you pressed two adjacent keys at once.
* So the intention was to space out the key presses, so that the user would alternate between left and write hands in typing.
* So of course, when we added keyboards to computers, we stole this layout from typewriters, because that's what people were already used to.

* The optimal way to use a QWERTY keyboard is to keep your hands on home row, and moving your fingers to move
* Except it doesn't actually work that well:
  * Awkward key combinations, like `tr`,
  * Sometimes have to jump over the home row, e.g. `br``
  *
* Because of letter frequency, most of the typing is actually done with the left hand. Because most people are right-handed, this can slow people down.
* Statistics on key presses:
  * 16% on lower row
  * 52% on top row
  * 32% on the home row

#### Other layouts
* Since QWERTY has so many issues, there are a few remapped layouts.

* Example: Dvorak
  * Letters should be typed by alternating between hands
  * 70% of letters are on home row
  * Bias towards right-handed typing, since most people are right-handed

* **Studies are inconclusive on whether there's any actual productivity difference when using a non-QWERTY keyboard layout.**
* An interesting point: it's really useful to be able to sit down on any computer and be able to

### Mechanical Keyboards
* If the keys are downsized (e.g. on a BlackBerry), it interferes with typing.

### Soft Keyboards
* on touchscreens, etc.
* You no longer get any sort of tactile feedback. You have to either get really good at touch typing, or hope that autocomplete works well enough.
* We're basically trading a physical keyboard to get a bigger screen.
* Soft keyboards are good on devices where you don't have to do a lot of typing. e.g. an iPad can be used mostly as a movie watching device

### Other variants
* Thumb keyboards - so that you could hold on the device and type reasonably well with just your thumbs
* Frogpad - one-handed keyboard, only 15 keys, plus some meta keys, and different combinations of meta keys lets you type different letters
* Chording keyboards - Douglas Engelbart proposed this - basically, a keyboard that only has 5 keys, and you type different combinations of keys.
  * Successor: [the Twiddler](http://twiddler.tekgear.com/)

### Predictive Text Input
* T9
* Autocomplete/autocorrect

### Others
* Palm Pilot's [Graffiti](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graffiti_(Palm_OS)) - had decent accuracy, but you needed to memorize this entire scheme.
* Natural handwriting recognition, e.g.
* [ShapeWriter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ShapeWriter) - original inspiration for Swype, let people type on a touchscreen without lifting their finger
  * IJQwerty - study that found people were much more productive when i and j were swapped on ShapeWrite
* [8pen](http://www.8pen.com/) - enter words by drawing loops
  * Seems like it'd be error prone, but

## Positional Input
* Ur-example: Etch-A-Sketch

### Properties
#### Sensing
* Force or **isometric**: Input data is in the form of direction and magnitude of force, e.g. joystick
* Displacement or **isotonic**: Input data is in the form of position difference, e.g. mouse

#### Position vs Rate Control
* Rate: joystick
* Position: mouse

#### Absolute vs Relative
* This describes how the input device is mapped to the display.
* **Absolute**: where you touch is directly mapped onto the display.
  * Example: A drawing tablet
* Normally, however, on a desktop we use **relative** input.
  * Example: moving the mouse moves the cursor proportionally, but doesn't teleport it to some absolute location.

#### Control-Display Gain
* The **gain** is the ratio of how fast the pointer moves to how fast the input device moves.
