# Ethics

CS 349 - User interfaces (whichever section I decide to go to)

7-25-2016

Elvin Yung

[Slides](https://www.student.cs.uwaterloo.ca/~cs349/s16/slides/13.1-ethics.pdf)

**NOTE:** This is *not* covered on the final, but it's still really important to know about if you plan on designing UIs in real life.

* Benevolent deception, malicious design
* Basically, manipulating the truth can be done for good or evil.
* It's possible to lie to users for their own good.

* Example: robotic physical therapy system
* Example: electronic switching system, i.e. for phones
  * When a switch fails, you could report the error to the user, which might confuse the users and reduce their confidence in the system.
  * Or, you could put them through to the wrong person, and they can just think they made the wrong call.
  * Arguably, this is *bad* deception.

* Example: Placebo buttons
  * e.g. crosswalk buttons, office thermostats, elevator close door buttons
  * Give people the illusion of control

* As designers, we want to balance between end-user expectations and the capabilities of the system.
* We use deception to fill the gap.

## Benevolent Deception
Some *gaps* that deceptive design is used to fill in:

### System vs. reality
* Maintain the user experience
  * e.g. Netflix recommender will never recommend nothing
* Hide uncertainty
  * e.g. Windows file operation time estimate
* Guarantee a level of entertainment
  * e.g. tweak game AI such that they give you a challenge without making it impossible
* Maintain consistency/expectations
  * e.g. artificial shutter noises from phone cameras

### Individual vs. Group
* e.g hiding whether the username or password was wrong in a login screen
* e.g. Sandboxing
* e.g. timesharing systems let many people pretend they own the computer

### Individual vs. Self
* Protect the user from themselves.
  * e.g. don't actually delete a file, just move it to the trash can.
  * e.g. [fake bus stop for Alzheimer's patients](https://www.fastcompany.com/1598472/uncommon-act-design-fake-bus-stop-helps-alzheimers-patients)

## Malevolent Deception
* Deception can *definitely* be bad, like:
  * Use confusing language (e.g. double negatives)
  * Hiding certain functionality (e.g. the unsubscribe button)
  * Exploiting user mistakes (e.g. torrent sites that have 10 different download buttons, 9 of which are on ads)

## Experimentation
* You've probably already encountered the idea of *A/B testing*, where you show different versions of a UI to different users.
* In general, experiments like these are helpful for figuring out the effects of different UI changes in a real-world environment.
* But sometimes the ethics are questionable.
* For example, Facebook manipulated news feed posts in 2013 to figure out how it changes emotions.

## tl;dr
* Build interfaces that you would let your grandmother use.
