# Design Process

CS 349 - User interfaces, LEC 001

5-30-2016

Elvin Yung

## User Centered Design

How do you build software for people who aren't you?

You have to talk to the customer, figure out:
* what they need
* what problems they have with current solutions

You need to think about the people who use your software, and to test your ideas with them.

*Developers are not people.* You are not the user - you can't just build it to your specifications.

### History

Started with the original Macintosh team at Apple.

The original process: bring in users, show them stuff, and iterate.

(citation needed. I can't seem to find any source that actually supports this claim; the closest I could get to was [Andy Hertzfeld's story](http://www.folklore.org/StoryView.py?project=Macintosh&story=Shut_Up.txt) about demoing a Mac prototype to Microsoft.)

### Principles
* Understanding users' needs
* Design the UI first - not the architecture. Choose the technology to fit the needs, not [the other way around](http://www.mongodb-is-web-scale.com/). (This isn't exactly a hard and fast rule - sometimes you need to figure out if something is technically feasible)
* Iterate!
* Use your own software - "Eat your own dogfood."
* Look at other people using it - and in real life, not some sort of lab.

### Iteration Cycle

TODO: add flowchart here

(Caveat: this diagram assumes you won't change the architecture, which isn't always true in real life.)

### Understanding the User
* *Observe existing solutions.* [It's important to see how the user uses the software.](http://javlaskitsystem.se/2012/02/whats-the-waiter-doing-with-the-computer-screen/) You need to design the scenario that you're working with, and meeting the requirements that they want.
* *List scenarios.* e.g. for an email client, figure out what the flow for sending an email should be like, replying to an email, forwarding an email, creating a mailbox, etc. Scenarios are great because they're a natural place to talk about what the user is doing, in the context that they're doing it. Collect data from a bunch of users - catch a wide range of use cases.
* *List and prioritize functions.* Figure out what scenarios need what, and prioritize.
* *List functions by frequency and commonality.* Common functionalities should be accessible with few clicks, more obscure use cases hidden in menus.

### Designing the UI
* *Temporal distribution*: steps in the flow
* *Spatial distribution*: where components appear on a section

* Use **storyboards** to mock up the basic flow for (typically) scenarios.
* Describe interaction sequences: plan interaction paths like a flowchart
* Testing the design: quickly prototype, test with users, and iterate.

6-6-2016

### Testing with Users
* AKA: Prototyping
* Iterate, refine.
* Specifically, let people interact with the design, and explore its sustainability.
* Goal: [Maximum feedback for minimum effort.](http://theleanstartup.com/principles#develop_mvp)
* Example: testing the first PDA prototype by making a wooden model of it, and then writing on it in front of people, and testing reactions
* Build software *last*! It's super expensive and time consuming.

#### Prototype Objectives
* Needs to answer this question: Does it work for this scenario?

#### What to prototype?
* You can prototype anything: concepts, navigation, mental models, layout, technical feasibility, usefulness, etc.
* This is the same thing as an experiment!

#### Prototype Fidelity
* The level of detail/care you put into the prototype.
* *Low* fidelity: Prototype doesn't look a lot like the real thing; the operations might be simulated or slower.
* *High* fidelity: Prototype looks and acts like the real thing.
* Even if you're confident in your design, *you want to build a low-fi prototype first*!
* People are way too nice to give real feedback. If you show people a high-fi prototype first, people will feel bad giving you more work.
* If you start with a low-fi prototype, you get more objective/higher level feedback because they know you haven't invested any time or effort into it.


#### Paper Prototyping
* Building a paper version of the interface, with a person playing the computer.
* A really good (and probably overkill) example: [Hanmail](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GrV2SZuRPv0).
* This is a concept called the *Wizard of Oz technique* or *Wizard of Oz experiment*, where you have a software interface, but a human acting as the backend to simulate the response.
* [Stripe](http://paulgraham.com/ds.html) does this!

* The interface should be as minimal as possible - just enough to get feedback. Speed is of the essence!
* Get feedback immediately.

#### When and How to Prototype

TODO: add chart here

#### Breadth vs. Depth
* You probably won't have enough time to test every flow - be able to cherrypick and prioritize which scenarios you want to test.
* Your interactive prototype will probably have spotty coverage in terms of features/scenarios.

## MIDTERM MATERIAL ENDS HERE
