# Android

CS 349 - User interfaces, LEC 001

6-20-2016

Elvin Yung

* Developing for Android is pretty similar to developing Swing apps for desktop - there's just some architectural differences to understand.
* Java doesn't tend to have great documentation - Sun wrote some documentation in the 90s and didn't really touch it since then.
* Android's the opposite. There's generally pretty great docs.

* Android apps run on the Dalvik virtual machine.
* Every process runs in its own VM and address space.

## Design Goals
* Multiple entry points for an app
* Different "activities" that you need to explicitly pass data between
* Applications need to be dynamic - need to handle many different types of devices, in different screen sizes and orientations

* Dealing with being a mobile device - limited memory, cpu, battery, etc.
* The system aggressively constrain processing - e.g. background threads are hard
* Small screen, multiple orientations, multi-touch

## Activities
* An **activity** is a screen that basically runs independently and has its own lifecycle, almost like a separate mini-app.
* Interesting lifecycle model - activities can have the states of *start*, *paused*, and *stopped*.
* Android pauses an application that's running in the background.
* If you start running out of memory, Android reserves the right to kill it.
* You're responsible for managing state, and implementing the `onStop`, `onCreate`, `onPause`, etc. callbacks to maintain data integrity.

* Data is passed between activities using an **intent**.
* A **fragment** is basically a portion of a UI that has its own state. Activities can contain multiple fragments.
* Since switching activities has an overhead, fragments were introduced as an alternative.

## Building UIs
* `android.view.ViewGroup` - like an `JPanel` with a Layout associated.
* `android.view.View` - base class for widgets, like `Button`, `ImageView`, etc.

## Managing layout
* You can write code to do this, but you're better off using XML to describe your layout, and telling the app to dynamically load them.
* The good thing about this is that you can define views for separate orientations, and Android is smart enough to switch between them automatically.

## Tools
* In this course, we're standardizing on Android Studio.
* Update stuff
* An AVD manager is provided to emulate different Android virtual devices. In this course we're standardizing on Nexus 7, on Marshmallow with API 23, ABI x86.
* (check the slides for the rest of this)
* Basically tl;dr follow the rules, don't try to use your own configs
