# Touch Interfaces

CS 349 - User interfaces, LEC 001

6-20-2016

Elvin Yung

[Slides](https://www.student.cs.uwaterloo.ca/~cs349/s16/slides/8.2-touch_interfaces.pdf)

## Prelude: Interaction Models
* We can describe interaction in terms of **look** and **feel**.
* **Look** is how things are presented in the interface - like the layout.
* **Feel** is how responsive the interface is, how users express intent and get feedback, etc.

* We've talked about the execution-evaluation model, but that's at a different level of abstraction.
* We're more concerned with the actual interaction with the application.


## Instrumental Interaction
* We're going to think of UIs as things that we physically interact with.
* A **domain object** is a thing that you're trying to manipulate.
* The **interaction instruments** are the things that you use to manipulate the domain object.
* We can use these concepts to decompose a UI.
* You can think of an interface as a bunch of tools that you can use to manipulate an object.

TODO: insert diagram from slide 7

### Activation
* The key thing when you're talking about instruments is **activation**, i.e. how do you trigger it?
* For example, with a scrollbar, how do you activate it? You click on it and drag to cause it to move, or click it in the gutter to get it to move in different directions.
* Another example: Making a rectangle in Powerpoint is basically a multiple step process: You have to find the widget to open the shape menu, click it, find and click the rectangle, and click-drag it on the canvas.

* You can think of instruments as being activated **spatially** or **temporally**.
* **Spatial** activation means that you directly cause it, usually by directly manipulating some part of the interface. e.g. the scrollbar
* **Temporal** activation means that there's a sequence of actions to activate it. e.g. Everything inside the shape menu, like making a rectangle.
* Most things are spatially activated to an extent, but have different *costs*, i.e. the amount of work it takes to perform that action.
* Usually, something that involves an object being selected is at least somewhat temporal, since it has the selection as a precondition.
* Dialogs are, by definition, temporal. You always have to do something to bring up the dialog.

TODO: add slide 10 diagram

#### Costs
* There are **cost** involved with different activations.
* For spatial activations, the cost is the space used, and the time it takes to activate it.
* The cost of activating something temporally is the action time of everything you have to go through to activate it.
* In general, spatial activation costs less than temporal activation, so (as you might expect) the most frequently used features should be spatially activated.

#### Tradeoffs
* If you don't want to incur temporal cost, you can always add more spatially-activated components.
* But that's also bad, because input devices clutter up the UI.
* The best way is to properly make tradeoffs and manage costs appropriately.

### Evaluating Instruments
#### Indirection
* The degree of **indirection** is how much you have to do to the instrument to perform the action.
* For spatial activation, the cost is higher when
* For temporal activation, the cost is higher

#### Integration
* The degree of **integration** is the similarity between the degrees of freedom of your input device and the instrument on the screen.
* For example, a scrollbar has a DOF of 1, and a mouse has a DOF of 2. The scroll wheel, however, *also* has a DOF of 1, so it is a better fit.
* Another example: Rotating a shape in 3D involves a DOF of 3, but a mouse still only has a DOF of 2. However, we can combine the mouse *with* a scroll wheel to get a DOF of 3, for a better fit.

#### Compatibility
* The degree of **compatibility** is how similar the physical action on the instrument is to the response from the interface.
* For example, dragging has a high degree of compatibility because the feedback directly maps to the motions to move the mouse.
* Scrolling has medium compatibility.
* A dialog box generally has low compatibility. When you change a font, you're doing a bunch of things that don't really feel compatible to what you do with your mouse.

# NUI
* An effort by a bunch of researchers to promote **natural** user interfaces.
* We're not going to talk about this at all - they're not really novel since they're basically touch interfaces.

## Touch Interfaces
* Up until now, we've been mostly talking about standard mice/keyboard driven GUIs.
* With the rise of multitouch-enabled devices like smartphones and tablets, touch-based interfaces are increasingly important.

### History
* How old is multi-touch?
* We'll go back on a common theme in technology: It takes a long time to go from a vision to a viable product.
* Bill Buxton started doing research with multitouch in the mid 1980s, but it was only in 2007 that the iPhone - the first popular consumer multitouch product - was released.

### Technology
#### Resistive Touchscreens
* Was literally two closely-pressed ("sandwiched" together) conductive layers, when a point is pressed together it registers the point
* Didn't handle multitouch

#### Capacitive Touchscreens
* Emitters at the 4 corners of the screen
* Indirectively measure change in capacitance to figure out where the finger tapped.
* Can also only handle one point.

#### Mutual Capacitance
* Has an array of sensors, and measure the capacitance change at every place.
* You need some conductive material touching it to actually trigger it.
* Handles multitouch!
* This is the touchscreen technology that's in every device now.
* Generally, modern phones have a ridiculous amount of sensors that we don't usually take advantage of completely.

#### Direct Touch Technology
##### Inductive
* Magnetic layer at the back of the screen.
* Magnetized stylus induces an electromagnetic field in the sensing layer.
* We might have active styluses that use bluetooth to talk to the device.
* Can combine with a capacitive touch screen, so that the device can process (and distinguish) touch and pen input.
* Expensive, and fairly rare. The magnetic layer is pretty expensive to produce.

##### Optical
* Literally have a camera watch the interface
* Flood an entire surface with infrared sensors to detect where people are touching it.
* Not super precise, but like mutual capacitance, cheaper at bigger sizes.

### Input

### Interaction

### Design
