# CS 251
## Computer Organization and Design
#### 1/13/2015
Elvin Yung

### Stuff
* Midterm is on February 12th.

### Digital Logic Desgin
* NAND gate truth table:

A | B | Q1 | Q2 | Q3 | Q4 | 2
--|---|----|----|----|----|---
0|0|L|L|H|H|1
0|1|L|H|H|L|1
1|0|H|L|L|H|1
1|1|H|H|L|L|0

* The distributive rule:
        
        X+YZ = (X + Y)(X + Z)  // why?
             = XX + XZ + XY + YZ
             = X(X + Y + Z) + YZ  // factor out X
             = X + YZ

### Formula Simplification using Laws
* Factor out things.

### Deriving Truth Table from Circuit
* Label intermediate gate outputs
* Fill in truth table in appropriate order

### Useful Components: Decoders
* `n` inputs, `2^n` outputs (converts binary to "unary")

### Register files
* Something something use decoders to perform read/writes on registers

### Multiplexors
* aka mux, or selector
* Suppose you have `2^n` inputs (or *lines*) `D_0..D_{2^n-1}`. Then you also have `n` other inputs `S_{n-1}..S_0`, called *select lines* which represents which one line out of `D` to select. 
* Example: 4-1 mux

S_1 | S_0 | Y
----|-----|---
0|0|D_0
0|1|D_1
1|0|D_2
1|1|D_3

### Buses
* A **bus** is a collection of data lines that are treated together as a single logical signal.
* In diagrams, 32-bit line buses are represented as slashed wires.
* A multiplexor allows us to select one bus over another.

### Implementing Boolean Functions: ROMs
* ROM stands for read-only memory.
* Think of a ROM as a table of `2^n` *m*-bit words, implementing *m* one-but functions of *n*-variables.
* Internally, a ROM consists of a decoder and an OR gate for each output.
* PLAs are simplified ROMs.

### Types of Memory:
* **RAM** is fast and volatile. It can be accessed very quickly and efficiently.
* **ROM** is memory that cannot be changed. It can only be written once.
* **Hard drives** are made up of several rigid metal, glass or ceramic disks.

### Clocks
* 

### SR Latch with NOR Gates
* There's like transitions and stuff