# CS 251
## Computer Organization and Design
#### 1/6/2015
Elvin Yung

Course site: [click](https://www.student.cs.uwaterloo.ca/~cs251/W15/)

### Office Hours
* Rosina Kharal
	* T: 10-11 am, Th: 12-1 pm
	* or by appointment
* Piazza: Posts replied usually within 24h

### Assignment Information
* Assignments due on Wednesdays
* Assignment 0 is optional (1% bonus)
* Dropbox outside MC 4065
* Avoid "excessive collaboration"

### Course guidelines
* Course notes are not a comprehensive substitute for lectures.
* Textbooks are helpful, but 
* *Computer Organization and Design* (Patterson and Hennessy) is a better textbook

### Clickers
* worth 5% of grade as participation marks
* top 75% of clicker input is taken

### How it all fits together...
* If we tried to build a usable computer system from scratch, it would certain overwhelm us.
* operating system, microprocessor, memory, networking, wireless connectivity, etc.
* managing the layers of complexity: work with individual layers of computer architecture, abstracting away details that are not important to the corrent layer.

### This course:
* Understanding computer architecture, structure, and evolution
* **Instruction set architecture**: conceptual structure and functional behaviour of comuputing systems, as seen by the programmer
* **Computer organization**: the different levels of physical implementation, described in terms of functional units and their interconnection, data flows

### Course outline
* MIPS review
* Digital logic design (gates, etc.)
* Data representation and manipulation (arithmetic with binary, floating point numbers)
* Designing a datapath
* Single-cycle control unit
* Multiple-cycle control units (hardwired and microprogrammed)
* Pipelining and hazards (how instructions are exeuted)
* Memory Hierarchies (caches and virtual memory)
* Input/Output
* Multiprocessor systems
* Case studies: VAX, SPARC, Pentium

### Guiding Principles: Computer Architecture Deisgn
* Use abstraction to simplify design.
* Moore's Law: the number of transistors on a circuit board will double ever ~18-24 months. 
* Expect rapid changes in technology.
* This motivates optimizing the common case rather than rare cases.
* Based on the 80-20 rule, you should optimize the 20% most used part of the product first.
* Improve performance via parallelism: do multiple tasks at once, and divide and conquer
* Improve performance via pipelining
* Improve performance via prediction

### Instruction Set Architectures
* To connect to the hardware, you must speak in its language.
	* Machine language - send it machine level instructions to interpret and execute.
* Different computers speak different dialects of the same language. (eg. MIPS, ARM, x86, etc.)

### Similarities in these architectures
* Based on the same tech principles
* Common basic operations, eg. arithmetic operations
* Similar goals: Maximize performance and minimize costs and energy

Basic flow: high level language code is compiled or interpreted (eventually) into bytecode, and then the hardware interprets the instruction piece by piece, executed in the pipeline

### MIPS
* Millions of Instructions per Second - which is *not* the versions we're interested in right now.
* Microprocessor without Interlocked Pipelined Stages
* RISC architecture: Reduced Instruction Set

* Computers execute assembly instructions in binary on computer, but text form for people
* Only simple operations: addition, subtraction, goto, conditional goto
* Instructions operate on registers (fast) and RAM (slow)

### Registers
* there are 32 registers of 32 bits/4 bytes each: `$0`..`$31` (or `$s0`..`$s7`, `$t0`..`$t7`)
* `$0` always contains 0

### Instructions
Instructions are 4 bytes each, so the PC increments by 4 bytes.
Three general types of MIPS instructions
* R-format: works with registers
	* e.g. `add $1, $2, $3`, store `$2+$3` in `$1`
* I-format: works with immediate values
	* e.g. `addi $1, $2, 100`, store `$2+100` in `$1`
* J-format: used for branching ("jump"), discussed later
	* e.g. `j 28` - goto 28

Memory access: special MIPS instruction to access 4gb ram, since 32 registers are clearly not enough.
* load word, `lw $1, 100($2)`, read data at `100+$2` into register `$1`
* store word: `sw $1, 100($2)`, write the data at `$1` to `M[100+$2]`

Conditional branch: e.g. branch if equal `beq $1,$2,100` - if `$1 == $2`, jump to (4*100)+4, or `bne` branch if not equal

