# CS 251
## Computer Organization and Design
#### 1/15/2015
Elvin Yung

### Clocks and Sequential Circuits
* Synchronous sequential circuits have clocks.
* Asynchronous sequential circuits do not.
* 

### SR Latch
* The most fundamental persistent circuit is the NOR-gate set-reset latch.
* The SR NOR latch maintains feedback using two connected NOR gates.
* As long as S and R are both 0, the value of Q will be persisted.
* When S and R are both 1, Q and not Q are both set to 0. This may lock the output at 1 or 0, causing a race condition.

### D Latch
* Some of the problems of the SR Latch can be mitigated with the D Latch.
* The core concept of D latch is based on the augmentation of the SR latch with a clock. 
* The value of *Q* can only be modified (from the input *D*) if and only if the value of *C*, the clock, is 1.

### D Flip-flop
* We want state to be affected only at discrete points in time.
* A master-slave design achieves this.
* The D flip-flop implements two D latches 

### Registers and Register Files
* A Register is an array of flip-flops, 32 for a word register.
* A register file is a way of organizing registers.
* In assembly, you essentially want to read from a maximum of two registers at once, or write to one register.
* The read logic for a register file consists of two multiplexors, which select data from two registers.
* The write logic consists of a decoder which writes to some register.

### Random Access Memories
* Static random access memories (SRAM) use D latches. 
* To mitigate the problem of 
* A three-state buffer has three outputs: 0, 1, and floating.

### Finite State Machines
* The behaviour of sequential systems is essentially stateful.
* Finite state machines are used to maintain discrete states.
* It is impossible to use a truth table to define a finite state machine, since a truth table is binary.