# CS 251
## Computer Organization and Design
#### 1/8/2015
Elvin Yung

### Performance
* Measuring performance depends on how you think about it.
* Running the same program on two different microprocessors/instruction sets/architectures, you want to know how fast each one is, or the **execution time**.
* **Throughput** is some measure of performance. There are standarized benchmarks, but they aren't completely reliable.
* For example:
	* Changing the processor to a newer/faster version decreases the execution time.
	* Adding in additional processors to a system increases the throughput, but the executing time of individual tasks remain unchanged.

### Uniprocessors to Multiprocessors
* **Moore's Law** describes the tendency for the number of transistors that can be placed on an integrated circuit board to double approximately every two years.

### Parallelism
* To take advantage of multicore architectures, we use parallel computing. 
* Parallelism in the pipeline will be discussed in the Pipelining unit.

### Digital Logic Design
* **Binary** digits are basic units in digital communication. They are an abstraction of high/low voltage, represnted as a 0 or 1.
* In early computing: Charles Babbage used relays and vacuum tubes to represent states of matter.
* The first transistor was invented in 1947 by William Shockley, John Bardeen, and Walter Brattain at the Bell Laboratiories. It was one of the most important electronics event of the 20th century, paving the way for integrated circuits and microprocessor technology.
* The transistor was cheap, reliable and small, utilizing voltage applied to a control terminal.
* In 1959, Robert Noyce patented a method of interconnecting many transistors on a single chip. 
* Today we can graft ~1b MOS or MOSFET transistor onto a 1cm^2 silicon wafer, each transistor costing 0.01 cents.

### Semiconductors
* **MOSFET** stands for Metal-oxide-semiconductor field effect transistors. It is also known as MOS transistors.
* Silicon is a poor conductor, but become better at conducting when small amounts of impurities, or **dopants**, are added to its lattice structure.
* The **N-type** of transistors, something
* The **P-type** of transistors, something else
* A MOS transistor are essentially a sandwich of layers of donducting and insulating materials.
* Base Collector and Emitter Model: **Gate-Source Drain**
* ThenMOS and pMOS are two types of transistors that have opposite behaviours that complement each other. The CMOS uses both nMOS and pMOS.

### Implementing Gates Using Transtors
* Key idea: When a current flows between the drain and the source, through the NMOS transistor (sitting within hte silicon wafer called the substrate).
* The problem is that this transmits a strong 0 but weak 1.
* In an NMOS NOT gate, when a voltage is applied through the gate, there is low resistance between the drain and the source, and the power is grounded, so the current is detected as a 0, and vice versa.
* The problem with an NMOS NOT gate is that when value is 1, there is lots of current flow.
* A PMOS transistor has opposite behaviour to the NMOS. It transmits a strong 1 but weak 0.

How to analyze CMOS circuits:
* Make a table with inputs, trasistors, and outputs. 
* For each row (each input setting), check whether the transistor resistance is high or low. If the output has a clean path to power, the signal is 1, and if the output has a clean path to ground, the signal is 0.

### CMOS
* CMOS circuits use both n-transistors and p-transistors. It will build circuits with "clean" paths to exactly one of power or ground.

### Using Gates in Ligic Design
* The OR (+) operator is 1 iff either operand is 1.
* The AND (.) operator is 1 iff both operands are 1.
* The NOT (Ā, for some operand A) operator inverts the operand.
* In practice, logic minimization software works with NAND or NOR gates, or at transistor level.

### Logic Blocks
* A **combinational** logic block is stateless.
* A **sequential** logic block has memory.
* Inputs and outputs are binary.

### Specifying input/output behaviour
* You can use a truth table to specify outputs for each possible input. It provides a complete description, but it might be redundant and hard to understand.
* **Canonical normal form** specifies the output as an expression of the input.
* A **minterm** is a logical product of variables. It is also called a product. I/O behaviour can be represented as either a sum of products, or a product of sums.
* A **don't care** term is represented as X instead of 0 or 1. When used in a truth table, it indicates we don't care what the particular output value is.

### Laws of Boolean Algebra
See course notes, I'm too lazy to copy all of them.
