# CS 240 Enriched
## Data Structures and Data Management
#### 1/13/2015
Elvin Yung

### More on Order Notation
Stuff on proofs.

### Order Classes
* $\Theta(1)$ is constant time.
* $\Theta(log n)$ is logarithmic time.
* $\Theta(n)$ is linear time.
* $\Theta(n log n)$ is pseudolinear time, which is also called sorting time.
* $\Theta(n^2)$ is quadratic time.
* $\Theta(n^3)$ is cubic time.
* $\Theta(2^n)$ is exponential time.
* $\Theta(n^k)$ is polynomial time.

* Textbooks usually emphasize that polynomial time is good. In practice, cubic and quadratic are both fairly inefficient, while pseudolinear and logarithmic are usually much better.
* You should always keep in mind the size of the input for the particular problem. If $f(x) \in O(g(x))$, but the intersection point is sufficiently large, it might still be better to use the solution that runs at $g(x)$ if the input size will be mostly sufficiently small.

### Limit Definition
* Let $f(n) > 0, g(n) > 0$ for all $n \geq n_0$. 
* Suppose that $L = \lim_{n \rightarrow \infty} \frac {f(n)} {g(n)}$.
* Then:
    * If $L=0$, $f(n) \in o(g(n))$.
    * If $0 < L < \infty$, $f(n) \in \Theta(g(n))$.
    * If $L < \infty$, $f(n) \in w(g(n))$.

### Order Laws
* $f(n) = \Theta(g(n)) \Leftrightarrow g(n) = \Theta(f(n))$
* $f(n) = O(g(n)) \Leftrightarrow g(n) = \Omega(f(n))$
* $f(n) = o(g(n)) \Leftrightarrow g(n) = \omega(f(n))$
* $f(n) = \Theta(g(n)) \Leftrightarrow g(n) = \Omega(f(n)) \land f(n) = \Omega$
* $f(n) = o(g(n)) \Rightarrow g(n) = O(g(n))$
* $f(n) = o(g(n)) \Rightarrow f(n) \neq \Omega(g(n))$
* $f(n) = w(g(n)) \Rightarrow f(n) neq \Omega(g(n))$
* $f(n) = w(g(n)) \Rightarrow f(n) \neq O(g(n))$

### Analysis of Running Time
* Given an algorithm, obtain the growth order of its running time.

More stuff on stuff


