# Chapter 1

CS 456 - Computer Networks

01-03-2017

Elvin Yung

## Syllabus
* This course has a required text; 6th edition is considered canon.
* Three programming assignments.
* Each assignment can be submitted up to 72 hours after deadline, with a penalty of 10% for each late day.
* Need to pass weighted exam average to pass the course

## Intro
* There are a multitude of *data* networks; we will focus on the Internet, the most popular one in use today.
* A network such as the Internet is really composed of a series of *layers* of protocols that provide abstractions.
* We will take a top-down approach, studying the OSI model from the *application* layer to the *data link* layer.

* Application layer: HTTP, SMTP, DNS, etc.
* Transport layer: Mostly care about TCP and UDP.
* Network layer: IP
* Data link layer: Ethernet, Wi-Fi (802.11), etc.

* A note on security: although the predecessor to the Internet, ARPANET, was built to be a military network, security was mostly developed after the initial network.

## The Internet
* The **Internet** is a global network of computers.
* It consists at the edge of **end systems** or **hosts**, like laptops and phones, and at the core **packet switches**, like routers.
* More importantly, the Internet is a *network of networks*.

* It would be infeasible for every device to have a dedicated link to every other device -- the number of links would essentially be `O(n^2)` with a large `n`.
* This motivates the concept of **packet switching**, where computers are connected in some **local area** network, and communicate outside it through multiple layers of indirection (**switches**, or **routers**).
* Data is divided into **packets**. A packet is the basic unit of communication that we are considering. You cannot send a bit by itself -- there is not enough information.

* A **protocol** is some agreed-upon way for two nodes to talk to each other.

### ISPs
* Most people are familiar with **ISP** or **internet service provider** in the form of access providers.
* A form of access network is **digital subscriber line** (or DSL), where voice and data travel over the same dedicated line, and are routed using a **digital subscriber line access multiplexer** (or DSLAM).
* In a **cable** network, the subscriber is connected to a **headend** through a coaxial cable.
  * Uses a technique called **frequency-division multiplexing**, in which the coaxial cable is divided into multiple **frequency bands**.
  * It uses a mixture of optical fiber and coaxial cables (**hybrid fiber coax**).

### Subscribers
* In a home network, a **modem** is used to connect to the headend. Downstream, the router and access point (usually combined into the same box) provide network access to devices.
* In an enterprise or institutional network, end systems generally connect to an Ethernet **switch**, which is connected to an upstream **router**.

Next: [January 5th](1-5.md)
