# Chapter 1 - Cont'd

CS 456 - Computer Networks

01-05-2017

Elvin Yung

Previous: [January 3rd](1-3.md)

## Physical Media
* Physical media essentially fall into two categories:
  * **guided**, in which data travels through some conduit.
  * **unguided** or **wireless**, in which data propagates freely over the air.

### Guided
* One of the most popular wires is **twisted pair**, in which insulated copper wires are twisted together to reduce interference.
* **Coaxial** cables consist of two copper conductors (which share the same geometric axis).
* **Fiber optic** cables is essentially glass fiber that represents bits as *pulses* of light.

### Unguided
* **Radio** is the quintessential form of unguided media.
  * Because it is propagated over air, it is affected by things like physical obstruction, and interference.

## Packet switching
* The network core consists of a graph of interconnected **packet switches** or **routers**.
* The network transmission is then essentially a traversal to forward packets from the source to the destination.
* Importantly, packet switching is **connectionless** -- state is not retained across multiple packets.

* As previously mentioned, data is not sent in the form of a stream of bits, but in discrete chunks called **packets**.
* The source is responsible for dividing up the payload into packets. The size of the packet, in bits, depends on the technology we are using.
* The time it takes to send the packet is called the transmission **delay**:
  * The size of the packet, `L` (in bits)
  * The transmission rate or **link bandwidth**, `R` (in bps, or bits per second, also known as **bitrate**)
  * Then the transmission delay is simply `L / R`.

### Store-and-forward
* The network works in a **store-and-forward** way: the entire packet must arrive at a packet switch before sending it to the next node.
* Why? A packet switch must verify the integrity of the packet, parse the header, etc. before sending it out again.
  * The [IP packet header](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc791#section-3.1) contains a **checksum** for the payload. If the check fails, the packet is dropped.
* The **end-to-end** delay is `2L/R`, if propagation delay is negligible.

### Queueing delay and loss
* Since the input and output link don't necessarily have the same bandwidth. If the output link is full, the router can do one of two things:
  * Drop incoming packets.
  * Store the packets in an internal *queue*, to be processed at a later time. (It is not exactly a simple FIFO queue.)

* In effect, a hybrid of both is done. The switch maintains some internal buffer of packets, but if the buffer fills up, it starts dropping incoming packets (this is **loss**, also known as *load-shedding*).

### Key network core functions
* **Routing** is how a router determines how to get the packet to the destination.
  * It is essentially a graph pathfinding problem, but "distributed". Each router has a set of "neighboring" routers (in the form of a hosts table), and some heuristic is used to

* **Forwarding** is how a router sends packets from the input link to the output link.
  * It's basically a scheduling problem. The packet queue on the routers are not necessarily simple FIFO queues, but can be more complicated scheduling logic/structures.

## Circuit switching
* Circuit switching is an alternative to packet switching. Most notably, it is used in phone calls (e.g. GSM).
* It is **connection-oriented**. You can imagine each connection as a (possibly continuous) stream of bits.
* Essentially, the router determines a path between the source and the destination, and then *reserves* resources for the connection.
* Resources are in the form of **channels** -- divisions of each link -- which, once reserved, are used exclusively for specific connections.
* By reserving channels on each link, we guarantee some level of quality for each connection.
* However, when the connection is idle, the channels are still reserved, so they are wasted.

### Channels
* There are two different ways to allocate resources: by frequency, and by time.
* In **frequency-division** multiplexing, a frequency range is reserved for each connection.
* In **time-division** multiplexing, the router cycles between different connections to forward data for.
  * With TDM, it is easier to add connections, since we do not have to reallocate frequency ranges.
* FDM and TDM are not mutually exclusive; they can be used together.

## Packet vs Circuit Switching
* In circuit switching, a lot of resources are wasted when connections are idle.
* Since users are probably not active 100% of the time, it is clear that with circuit switching is very inefficient.
* In other words, packet switching allows more users to use the network.

* Packet switching is better at handling bursty data, but the network can get congested.
* Realistically, the way to get around this is by increasing the bandwidth of the links.

Next: [January 10th](1-10.md)
