# STAT 231
## Statistics
#### 1/9/2015
Elvin Yung

### Recall: Numerical Summaries
* **Measures of location**: sample mean, median, mode
* **Measures of variability or dispersion**: sample variance, sample standard deviation, range, IQR
* **Measures of shape**: sample skewness, kurtosis

### Graphical Summaries
* a bunch of graphs
* We won't be required to draw graphs on tests and exams, but only to be able to understand them.

### Sample Correlation
* Measures the *linear* correlation between 2 variables. 
* It is a value $-1 \leq r \leq 1$ which is proportional to how two variabtes are linearly related.

### Statistical Models
* A **statistical model** is a mathematical model that incorporates probability.
* Using a statistical model helps us estimate unknown parameters, model variate variations, and draw conclusions from some degree of uncertainty. 
* Most importantly, with a statistical model, we can characterize a process and simulate it computationally.

### Response vs. Explanatory Variates
* In general, there are two types of variates in a statistical model.
* **Response variates** are  
* **Explanatory variates** are used to explain or determine the distribution of some other 

### Descriptive Statistics
* **Descriptive statistics** is a way to portray data to show features of interest.
* The numerical and graphical summaries we have studied thus far are all examples of descriptive statistics.
* More complex use cases include: knowledge discovery, data mining, machine learning, etc.
* Essentially, the goal is to find interesting patterns and relationships from the data.

### Statistical Inference
* **Statistical inference** is when data obtained in the study of a process or population are used to draw general conclusions about the subject.
* *Inductive reasoning** is when we reason from specific details to general conclusions. Statistical inference is a type of inductive reasoning.
* This is opposite from **deductive reasoning**, which is (in mathematics) using general axioms to prove specific theorems.


