# STAT 231
## Statistics
#### 1/9/2015
Elvin Yung

### Data summarization

#### Measures of variability or dispersion
* Central tendency is not the best way to measure data location. 

##### Sample variance and sample standard deviation
* The **sample variance** is defined as $s^2=\frac {1} {n-1} \binom {i=1} {n} {(y_i - y_avg)^2}$ (TODO: fix this).
* The **sample standard deviation** is *s*, the square root of s^2.
* If the data is unimodal, approximately 69% of the data will lie within 1 standard deviation of the mean, in the range $(\bar{y} - s, \bar{y} + s)$. Approximately 95% of the data will lie within 2 standard deviations.

#### Range
* The range is defined as $max(y) - min(y)$.

#### Interquartile range (IQR)
* The ***p*th-percentile* for a dataset is the value such that *p* percent of the data fall at or below this value.
* The **lower/first quartile** is the 25th-percentile.
* The **middle quartile** is the 50th-percentile. This is also the median.
* The **upper quartile** is the 75th-percentile.

* The **interquartile range** is defined as $q(0.75)-q(0.25)$. In other words, 
* The interquartile range is a more robust measurement of the spread since, unlike the range, it will not be affected by extreme values in the set.

* The **five-number summary** is a robust summay of the dataset. It consists of the set of numbers ${y_{(1)}, q(0.25), q(0.50), q(0.75), y_{(n)}}$, where $y_{(i)}$ is the $i$th largest number of the dataset, and q(i) is the $i$th percentile of the dataset.

#### Sample skewness
* Skewness is a measure of asymmetry in the dataset. Essentially, it indicates what side of the graph the majority of the data is skewing towards.
* A *negative* skew indicates that the data is tailed on the right side of the graph.
* A *positive* skew indicates that the data is tailed on the left side of the graph.
* **Sample skewness** is defined as `a bunch of stuff I'm going to copy from the slides later`.

#### Sample kurtosis
* **Sample kurtosis** measures whether the data are concentrated in the central peak or in the tails.
* Data that look normal or bell-shaped have a sample kurtosis close to 3.
* Data that are very peaked have a sample kurtosis larger than 3.
* Data that look uniform have a sample kurtosis close to 1.2.
* In other words, the sample kurtosis is proportional to the amount of data concentrated about the mean, and is inversely proportional to how "flat" the graph is.

### Visualizing data
#### Histograms
* In a *standard* histogram:
    * Partition the data into *k* non-overlapping **bins**. 
    * Measure the number of data points that fall into each interval. This is the bin's **frequency**.
    * Draw a bar graph which plots each bin to its frequency.
* In a *relative* histogram:
    * stuff happens

### Empirical c.d.f

### Boxplots

### Scatterplots
* Simply graph all (x, y) pairs as coordinates. A data point is a data point.